# Significant Features of ESGF-NG

* **Index Consolidation** - ESGF-NG consolidates federation search indices from roughly a half dozen peer-to-peer indices to two synchronized catalogs: an "East" catalog operated by UK-CEDA and a "West" catalog operated by US-Globus. The two catalogs are synchronized such that any change in one will shortly (not necessarily instantaneously) be reflected in the other. See the Status Updates section below for details about the East and West catalogs.
* **Move to STAC** - ESGF-NG replaces the simple search index (implemented in Apache Solr) with a STAC catalog. See [stacspec.org](https://stacspec.org/) for API and data model specifications. ESGF discovery and data access interfaces must use the STAC APIs provided by the East and/or West ESGF catalogs. (The APIs are identical and their contents are synchronized, but they're physically hosted on different continents and operated independently.)
* **Choice of Authentication Services (for Publication)** - We continue to use the ESGF-Publisher application for data publication. Each modeling center will configure the publisher application to work against either the East or the West ESGF STAC catalog. Publishing requires an initial registration with one of the ESGF STAC catalogs and subsequent authentication for each application run. Centers that prefer Globus authentication will use the West STAC catalog. Centers that prefer EGI Check-In authentication will use the East STAC catalog. See the Status Updates section below for details about publisher registration.
* **Enhanced Metadata Validation** - The East and West STAC catalogs perform metadata validation for all catalog changes (publication, updates, and retractions). The catalogs will reject new items (or updates to existing items) if the supplied metadata does not observe the CMIP7 metadata schema or the controlled vocabularies for field values.
* **ESGF Event Stream** - The ESGF core architecture now includes an [event stream](../core_architecture/event_service.md). While the primary purpose of this event stream is to synchronize the East and West STAC catalogs, the event stream offers a new way for ESGF services to take action in response to catalog changes. For instance, an ESGF data node can monitor the event stream and create local replicas of high-interest datasets as they appear in the catalog. Or, the ESGF Rapid Evaluation Framework (REF) may execute assessments when high-interest datasets become available at specific data nodes. See the Status Updates section below for details about the ESGF event stream.

## More information

* [Proposal for the ESGF-NG core core_architecture](../core_architecture/proposal.md)
* [ESGF-NG design](../core_architecture/design.md)
